MSC4132: Deprecate Linking to an Event Against a Room Alias (#4132)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4132-deprecate-event-on-room-alias-uris.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

None, in my opinion. This MSC deprecates a feature and already appears to be unimplemented (for the most part).

Reviewer 2: Just pointing out that it seems that Nheko does this as of 0.11.3, which is currently the latest release.

# MSC4132: Deprecate Linking to an Event Against a Room Alias.

## Introduction

> The spec supports 2 types of URI, the [Matrix scheme](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/appendices/#matrix-uri-scheme)
> and [matrix.to](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/appendices/#matrixto-navigation) links which allow deep linking to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The spec supports 2 types of URI, the [Matrix scheme](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/appendices/#matrix-uri-scheme)
and [matrix.to](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/appendices/#matrixto-navigation) links which allow deep linking to
```

(the unstable links may break without notice, and after the MSC is merged would point to new info instead of old)

Matrix users, rooms and events. Event URIs can be constructed against either a room ID or a room alias the latter of
which is fragile issue as a room's alias is mutable and so event links may be broken by changes to the alias. Users
expect deep links to continue working so that older links continue to show the correct content. Therefore it is proposed
to deprecate event links against a room alias.

## Proposal

As room IDs are immutable, event URIs built against these will continue to work for as long as the room is reachable by
the homeserver. In contrast, event URIs built against a room alias can break under the following circumstances:
- The room is upgraded, resulting in the alias pointing to the new room, which won't contain any events from the
  ancestor.
- The alias is removed/changed resulting in a dead link that can't be resolved.

> The proposal would deprecate the 2 following URIs:

Reviewer 3: ...and mark it in the spec as not to be used in future.

In terms of whether we can yank it out entirely: has anyone *ever* seen one of these in the wild? I'm searching the matrix.org DB for them, but anecdotally i don't think i've ever seen a client which created them

> The proposal would deprecate the 2 following URIs:

Reviewer: I've certainly seen them, but they were manually generated rather than by a client. Best practice appears to already be to not generate such links.

I don't think we can safely jump to removal, though. https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4127 is an example of another trivial thing which ended up wanting a second MSC anyways.

> The proposal would deprecate the 2 following URIs:

Reviewer: re: clarifying what deprecation means - it'd be good to also link to the deprecation policy: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/#deprecation-policy

- Link to `$event` in `#somewhere:example.org`: `matrix:r/somewhere:example.org/e/event`
- Link to `$event` in `#somewhere:example.org`: `https://matrix.to/#/%23somewhere:example.org/%24event%3Aexample.org`

## Potential issues

Whilst most clients do take the sensible route and generate event URIs against a room ID (even when it has an alias), as

> it is part of the spec these kinds of links likely exist somewhere in room history. This would mean that after

Reviewer 4: `room history` yes but maybe also `World Wide Web` as a larger place to find matrix.to links :)

Author: Oh yeah! 😅

> deprecation clients may still want to handle these URIs when tapped.

Reviewer 5: I'm not really sure what "tapped" means here.

Reviewer 5: Ah-ha! I suspect "received" might be more general!

Author: Are you telling me that messaging doesn't always revolve around a touch screen?! 😅

## Alternatives

An alternative would be to leave things as they are, although this wouldn't be the best choice for the user.

## Security considerations

It is unlikely that accepting this change would introduce any security considerations. If anything, it may improve the

> hypothetical situation where a deep link could be being redirected to modified content by moving an existing room alias

Reviewer 5: Event IDs are globally unique so I don't *think* there's a real security hole here, but 100% agree on the UX win.

Author: TIL they're globally unique.

Reviewer 6: There was a somewhat contentious discussion in the community whether we should assume them to remain globally unique and not scoped to rooms, for technical reasons ("sharding" the event id space, effectively). That is not relevant to the issue discussed here though: an event id is essentially a hash of certain parts of event JSON, therefore unique by design, barring hash collisions.

Reviewer 5: Yeah -- I don't think we need any change here.

# MSC4132: Deprecate Linking to an Event Against a Room Alias.

## Introduction

The spec supports 2 types of URI, the [Matrix scheme](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/appendices/#matrix-uri-scheme)
and [matrix.to](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/appendices/#matrixto-navigation) links which allow deep linking to
Matrix users, rooms and events. Event URIs can be constructed against either a room ID or a room alias the latter of
which is fragile issue as a room's alias is mutable and so event links may be broken by changes to the alias. Users
expect deep links to continue working so that older links continue to show the correct content. Therefore it is proposed
to deprecate event links against a room alias.

> ## Proposal

Author: Updated.

As room IDs are immutable, event URIs built against these will continue to work for as long as the room is reachable by
the homeserver. In contrast, event URIs built against a room alias can break under the following circumstances:
- The room is upgraded, resulting in the alias pointing to the new room, which won't contain any events from the
  ancestor.
- The alias is removed/changed resulting in a dead link that can't be resolved.

The proposal would [deprecate](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/#deprecation-policy) the 2 following URIs:

> - Link to `$event` in `#somewhere:example.org`: `matrix:r/somewhere:example.org/e/event`

Author: Oh yeah, good point, I've added these.

One small thing I noticed: The examples I have given are from the spec, which interestingly don't the `:` in the room alias of the matrix.to event URI (but does for everything else). Probably not worth worrying about but mentioning it in case I'm missing something here.

- Link to `$event` in `#somewhere:example.org`: `https://matrix.to/#/%23somewhere:example.org/%24event%3Aexample.org`

Specifically this means it would be marked in the spec as not to be used in future and clients should:
1. Stop making new event URIs with room aliases.
2. Continue to accept them as it will take time for other clients to update and legacy events will continue to exist.

## Potential issues

> Whilst most clients do take the sensible route and generate event URIs against a room ID (even when it has an alias), as

Reviewer 7: While this isnt a new Problem it might be worth mentioning again: clients already for spaces dont always Update the vias leading to unstable or unreachable ids after a while as some rooms have lots of single User homeservers. In which case a user leaving can result in the via to become non functional. This is the equivalent of the alias being removed basically.

Author: Have added something to cover this, I think it captures everything you've mentioned.
